Once around the most massive white dwarf
in the constellation of Aquilla the
eagle, there is a small blue star right
up next to the border with the
constellation of Hercules marked on the
star map there with the little red
circle. But it's not the dot that's
inside the circle. It's actually a much
much fainter star magnitude 15.7. So
below the level of detectability for
anything but professional telescopes
really. And what was noticed that
brought this to everybody's attention
was the way that it was fluctuating
rapidly.
The discovery and the identification of
this weird behavior was made by the Ziki
transient facility.
This is a telescope that's set up to
look repeatedly at parts of the sky and
detect that things have changed
brightness. There is could be because
they're moving or because they are
exploding stars, novi, supernovi,
asteroids, flickering flares, quazars,
all sorts of objects. And the weird
detection was that this little star was
changing its brightness in a most
peculiar way.
And we have since discovered that it is
a white dwarf star that seems to go with
the territory with stars around about
that brightness and the color in
particular that was observed. And it was
given the designation ZTF for Vicki
transient facility J1901 + 1458.
Bit of a mouthful really. So we'll just
call it ZTF from now on.
So the GIA satellite got involved and
measured the distance to ZTF which
turned out to be just 135 light years
putting it in the relatively near part
of the galaxy.
And that's important because we're going
to use that in a bit of a calculation.
The other thing we're going to use is
the relationship between the apparent
brightness of an object and its absolute
power controlled by the inverse square
law of distance. If you observe an
object with an apparent brightness B and
you are at a certain distance away, then
the amount of power you receive will
have spread out over the surface area of
a larger and larger sphere as the
distance increases. So if you have an
absolute power output P, also known as
the luminosity, and you know the
distance D, you can put together a
relationship where the apparent
brightness B is equal to the power
output P divided by the area of the
sphere over which the power has spread 4
pi D^ 2. The formula for the surface
area of a sphere being 4<unk> * the
radius squared. So that's very
straightforward.
But if we look at the light coming from
the star, we don't just see the
brightness. We can also split it up into
the spectrum. And when we do that, we
learn about the chemical composition of
the star and its atmosphere, its
environment. because of the lines, the
Fraenhoffer lines where particular
elements and molecules cut particular
wavelengths of light out of the
spectrum. But it's not just the position
of those lines that tells us something.
It's also the nature of them. And white
dwarf stars often show very broad lines
as in the graphics here because of the
very high pressure that exists at the
surface of the star. This is because
they are such small dense compact
objects that the surface gravity is very
very strong indeed and so the width of
the lines gets broadened and that can
also happen because of high-speed
rotation and they can be affected by
magnetic fields and other effects. So a
detailed study of them is needed in
order to try and untangle exactly what's
going on. But the other thing that the
light tells us is the spectrum uh gives
us the color. When we look at the amount
of light given out at different
wavelengths and we find where the peak
in the power output lies that is a
direct relationship to the temperature.
The graph on the right here shows what
happens. That for a 30,000 degree red
hot object, you get a peak uh just
around about 750 nanometers, just to the
left of the one micrometer mark into the
region that makes red light appear in
through our eyes. heated up a bit to
4,000 and the peak gets taller and moves
to the higher energy, shorter wavelength
green light. Keep going and you get blue
at about 5,000. And if you keep on
going, then the peak gets taller and
taller and moves into the ultraviolet.
And the spectrum of light coming from
ZTF showed that it has a temperature of
46,000
Kelvin. very very hot indeed and the
peak output is way into the ultraviolet.
But we can do something more
sophisticated. We can use the Stefan
Boltzman law to to derive the true power
output
per unit of surface area. So if we have
the total power output of the star P and
the surface area of the star A which of
course is 4 pi times the radius of the
star squared then P / A is proportional
to the fourth power of the temperature
and from laboratory experiments we can
determine that that constant of
proportionality sigma is the number
shown on the screen there. So we get P /
A in jewels/ second per square meter.
And if we bring all of those facts
together, we can do a little bit of
maths.
So we have that the brightness B equals
the power output divided by 4 pi D^ 2
where D is the distance. We have P / A
equ= sigma T ^ 4 where T is the
temperature and A is the area which is 4
pi * the radius of the star squared.
Do a little bit of rearrangement. We
take the second equation and multiply
both sides by A. We get P= sigma A T 4.
And then we substitute for P into the
first equation. And so we get b = sigma
4<unk> ^ 2 t 4 / 4 d^ 2.
And we can do a bit of cancelling and
cancel out the fours and the pi and we
get b = sigma r 2 t 4 over d^ 2.
Rearrange that to get r on its own. We
get r 2 = b d^ 2 over sigma t ^ 4. And
we've got a lot of square powers. So
let's just take the square root. We get
the r the radius of the star is equal to
d the distance of the star from us times
the square root of the apparent
brightness divided by sigma all divided
by the square of the temperature. And we
know the temperature, the distance, and
the apparent magnitude. That's 15.7
135 light years. and uh 46,000 Kelvin.
And we know sigma from our lab
experiments. So we can plug all of those
in and compute the radius of the star.
Having never seen it as anything other
than a point of light just from the
brightness and the spectrum of the
light, we can figure out its size. I
think that's quite interesting. And what
we get when we do that is 2,140
kilometers for the radius,300
miles or so. So this is getting on for
the size of the Earth's moon. It's
nowhere near as big as a typical white
dwarf, which would be Earth planet
sized, 6,400 km radius, something much
more like that. So this is a third of
the radius of a typical white dwarf.
Now the other thing we know about white
dwarfs is that rather than growing when
you add more material, they actually
shrink. You add more material, you add
mass, gravity gets stronger.
But gravity is resisted by the electron
degeneracy pressure, a back pressure
caused by the poly exclusion principle
of quantum mechanics that stops you
squeezing electrons into an infinitely
small space
and keeps the electrons apart. And the
more electrons you have, the more you
would expect them to want to stay apart
from each other. But actually the
electron degeneracy pressure grows more
slowly when you add material than the
gravity. And so the balance is towards
higher density forcing the electrons
into higher and higher stress levels.
And so the white dwarf shrinks and so
large white dwarfs are smaller. And here
we have one that's a third the size of
typical ones in radius. Um, so the
volume is tremendously smaller. It's a
third by a third by a third. So it's a
27th of the volume and must be
incredibly dense as a result.
And is likely to be the most massive and
in fact the estimates are that this is
the most massive white dwarf yet found
with a mass figure of 1.35 solar masses.
Now, that's getting close to the
absolute upper bound, the theoretical
Chandra Seca limit of 1.44 solar masses.
Any heavier than that and boom, a white
dwarf is predicted to detonate as a type
1A supernova. And we see that uh very
commonly and are very confident of these
numbers.
Now the Chandra Seca limit says that
white dwarfs are stable so long as their
mass is below this value. Once the mass
is increased perhaps by gaining material
from a giant partner, you have initial
situation of two fairly massive stars.
And the most massive one grows through
its life cycle the most quickly, becomes
a giant, and then shrinks back down to a
white dwarf and expels its atmosphere.
And then the second partner enters the
giant phase. And thing with giant stars
is they don't have a very strong grip on
their outer layers. And so the strong
gravity of the white dwarf can often
start siphoning material away, drawing
it into an accretion disc and spiraling
it down onto the white dwarf, building
the mass up. And of course, eventually
if that mass tips the star over the
limit, then you get a type 1A supernova
and the entire white dwarf is wiped out.
The other thing we notice about ZTF is
it is spinning incredibly rapidly. Once
every 7 minutes, 416 seconds. That's
very, very fast indeed for a white
dwarf. Usually of the order hours to
days,
not minutes. It's not the record holder.
There is one known as epic 2889399
929 which goes a little more quickly at
5.3 minutes but this is getting up
there. It's really fast and that is
going to mean that there's terrific
centrifugal acceleration or centripedal
acceleration depending on your point of
view. So the star is likely to be fairly
oblate actually.
Now from the spectrum of the stars you
can also usually tell the composition
and I just wanted to say a word or two
about what happens with white dwarfs. So
if the progenitor star the original star
is more sorry is less than about eight
solar masses then what happens is it
will go through its life cycle form a
red giant go through the blue loop and
become an asimtoic giant branch star
where the second phase of nuclear fusion
kicks off. So in the normal life of the
star, hydrogen is converted to helium in
the core. And in the second phase, the
AGB phase, then the core converts helium
into carbon and then on into oxygen. And
so you end up with a ball of carbon and
oxygen in the center of these stars.
If the stars a little bit more massive
and the figures are somewhere between 8
and 10 and a half solar masses then that
process can run a little further and
create the next elements in the chain
neon and magnesium.
Such stars like that are fairly rare
actually and white dwarfs from them are
there are some but there are not very
many. The reason for that is that larger
stars are rarer in general and actually
8 to 10.5 solar masses is quite a narrow
range. So they don't get too many of
these.
But whatever it's made of, when the star
dies and puffs off its outer layer in a
planetary nebula, leaving behind the
exposed core,
all the heavier elements will tend to
sink to the bottom and the lighter
elements will float over the top. And so
you get like an onion structure with
layers and if they is any helium or any
hydrogen left over, then that can form a
skin on the surface. Now the hydrogen
can get burned off and I don't mean
burned I mean it under goes nuclear
fusion to create more helium and that
sometimes happens in flashes that uh we
call novas where the star suddenly
brightens as there's a bit of runaway
thermonuclear activity on the surface
and that tends to mean that they don't
show very much hydrogen. they can do.
But in any event, the
elements in the spectrum of the star are
revealed by all those dark lines. So we
can usually tell what the surface is
made of. Somewhat harder to estimate the
core.
What we can also tell from the spectrum
is the magnetic field. This has an
effect on those lines in the spectrum.
And what we see here is an absolutely
enormous field. Nearly a billion times
that of the sun. Now, because it is so
small, compact, dense, and spinning so
fast, this makes some sense. As things
shrink in size,
conservation of angular momentum means
that they have to spin faster to achieve
the same result. And so rather like a
skater on an ice rink going into a spin
and then pulling their arms in, the rate
of rotation spins up. So it may be that
the shrinkage down to this very compact
object indeed has resulted in a bit of a
spin up and a high degree of spin is
just what you need for the dynamo effect
to kick in and make a strong magnetic
field.
But all of that really we have to go
back to the thing that got us interested
in ZTF in the first place and that's the
rapid changes in brightness. You can see
how rapid they are in the light curve
over on the right there which is a whole
series of oscillations.
Now the strange thing about this caused
people to follow up with other
telescopes and in particular the KEK
observatory had a good look at the light
and the spectrum of the light coming
from ZTF
and to everyone's surprise it showed
that these rapid oscillations are mostly
down to the rotation of the star and
that one face of the star seem to be
showing hydrogen and no helium and the
other face of the star was showing
helium and no hydrogen.
Something very very peculiar was going
on. So much so that the star has been
nicknamed Janus for the famous two-faced
character in history.
So what's going on? Is the star in some
sort of state of flux? Is it in the
process of consuming that last hydrogen,
but it's only happened on one part of
the star? Is there this some sort of
asymmetric effect of the very powerful
magnetic field causing things to be
different between one hemisphere and the
other? Or could the star have been
formed in two parts fairly recently?
Well, that's very interesting, and we
really aren't sure of the answer.
It could be the merger of two stars.
So the two white dwarf stars coming
close to each other and merging would
seem to fit various parts of the
evidence. It would fit the rapid spin
because not only do you have the high
spin rate of each of the individual
stars because they're quite small and
compact
and the spin up caused by the
contraction with the higher mass leading
to a smaller radius. but also the fact
that the orbital
angular momentum
held by the stars as they were whirling
around each other would have been worked
up into the spin rate as they spiraled
together and that it's highly possible
that that has produced um this result.
It could be that this merger has not yet
fully mixed and that that's a merger of
two slightly different white dwarf stars
giving us those two hemispheres. But as
I say, we haven't really got to the
bottom of this yet. What's also
interesting is that the sum of the
masses will lead potentially to it
exceeding the Chandra Seca limit. If you
had two stars that were 0.8 eight solar
masses each, they would add up to 1.6
and that would blow the star up as a
supernova type 1A. Um, but here maybe
it's accounting for the fact that we had
two stars of about 0.6 and 0.7 solar
masses and we ended up with one of 1.35
and that uh that's just below the limit.
Now these stars when you have a pair of
white dwarfs will merge eventually
because as they orbit around each other
energy gets radiated away in the form of
gravity waves ripples of spaceime a
prediction of Einstein that was recently
discovered first with black holes then
with neutron stars and eventually with
orbiting white dwarfs and it saps away
the overall energy of the system causing
them to spiral. inwards and eventually
you get a merger. But it is slow. It's a
very slow process for these relatively
low mass objects in wider orbits. As
they spiral together, the waves will get
stronger and stronger and the rate of
inspiraling will increase um until they
finally make contact. We see that in the
gravity wave detections. But to begin
with, it's quite slow.
And that's important because we use
white dwarf stars as standard candles to
estimate distance.
The logic goes that a type 1A supernova
explodes when the combined mass of all
the infalling material onto the white
dwarf from its giant companion tips it
over the limit at 1.44 44 solar masses
and causes the system to explode.
This is such a bright event, it can be
seen not just in our galaxy or in
neighboring galaxies, but in galaxies
over vast cosmic distances.
And because they all explode at the same
power output,
they can be used
as standard candles to work backwards to
work out the distance rather as we did
before when we were working out the
size. In that case, we knew the
distance. But if we see one of these in
a distant galaxy, which is what's
happening in the photo on the right, we
can infer the distance from the ratio of
the uh observed power to this standard
candle power of the disruption of 1.44
solar masses. So they're used to
estimate distance.
And that's important because the
discovery of the effect called dark
energy was dependent entirely on the use
of them as standard candles.
What they did was tracked the brightness
of a lot of type 1A supernovi and
compared the inferred distance on the
y-axis with the apparent red shift
caused by cosmological space expansion.
on the horizontal axis there. And if the
universe was uh denser, then you would
have got enough mass to have been below
the red line. And the result would have
been that there would have been a
collapse under gravity. If it was
completely in balance, then you should
have found the fit being entirely along
the red line. But what was observed was
that towards longer red shifts, greater
overall distance, the
best fit line through all the blue
points was well above the line.
And that tells us that the rate of
cosmic expansion has not been constant
and in fact has been accelerating in the
recent past.
And this was a huge surprise and led on
to a Nobel Prize and we now call the
effect dark energy thought to be a
pressure a negative pressure in fact
inherent in space which under general
relativity causes space to expand.
But if some type 1A supernovi are from
systems where a pair of massive white
dwarfs can merge together, they would
exceed the Chandraka limit and be a
super Chandra Seca event. They would
probably look just like a white dwarf,
but they would have abnormal brightness.
And in theory, such a merger event could
be almost up to 200%. If you had two
just subcritical white dwarfs and they
happened to merge, then you would get uh
nearly double the overall power output.
And such superchandra events could
influence this entire relationship.
Why does that matter? Well, actually
occurred to me that
if you have mergers as the result of the
inspiring of white dwarfs and that this
takes a long time cosmically speaking as
the gravitational radiation is quite
weak to begin with, then these merges
would happen
late
in terms of the overall time scale of
the process.
White dwarfs are already late in the
process because they are the product of
fairly long lived stars. Um and so if
they then have to undergo this inspiring
and that takes a long time as well then
it might mean that late time samples in
the data set might be full of a higher
proportion of superchandra events than
early time.
early times, you would not get very many
of these events because you would
probably find that they hadn't spiraled
into each other yet. And so this could
be biasing the data. And it would be
interesting to look into that and see if
we could find a way to pick that apart.
And there's another effect that might
bias the data and that is white dwarf
death not from excessive weight but from
electron capture in the core. Electron
capture is where an electron and a
proton plus and minus hit each other
forming a neutron and spitting out an a
particle called a neutrino.
And this can happen. In fact, it does
happen in many situations. And it is
part of the process that creates neutron
stars. During the collapse of very
massive stars, the pressure in the core
overwhelms the electron degeneracy and
rams the electrons into the protons,
creating neutrons and forming a neutron
star rather than stopping at a white
dwarf.
But inside the core of a white dwarf,
something could be going on right now.
You could be very slowly seeing the
electrons merging with the protons. This
would happen very very slowly, but never
at a zero rate. It can always occur at
any temperature and conditions.
But more significantly, if you have
heavier nuclei, not just isolated
protons, but perhaps magnesium nuclei or
neon nuclei, they have a greater
positive charge and are much more able
to capture an electron. And if they
capture an electron and convert one of
their protons into a neutron, then the
electron is no longer available to
create electron back pressure and
thereby resist collapse under gravity.
So the balance between gravity and the
electron pressure will degrade over
time. So as the heavy elements sink into
the core,
this can accelerate the electron capture
reactions and cause the white dwarf to
collapse. Now this could lead to a
subchandra
mass 1A supernova or a direct collapse
to a neutron star. And this is something
that we are looking to try to observe.
But again, if we had a lot of type 1A
supernova impostors from subchandra mass
events caused by electron capture caused
by the fact that we have white dwarves
which contain not just carbon and oxygen
in their core but the heavier elements
as well. then perhaps we are looking at
a bias whereby some of the events are
not as powerful as they might be. And so
there are a couple of biases that need
to be looked into in the dark energy
data and uh be very very interesting to
see how that plays out. So, thanks very
much for listening to this tour once
around the star ZTF and uh to some of
the implications of its existence for
the nature of white dwarfs and the
implications perhaps for our thoughts on
dark energy. Thanks for listening.